+++
title = "I Don't Care: Existential Sovereignty as a Foundation for Fluid Christianity"
date = 2018-04-28
lastmod = 2018-04-28
authors = ["admin"]
tags = ["Andrews University", "college essays", "literature", "religion", "mathematics", "science"]
+++

My original intent was to post my worldview essay in six months or so, once the traumatic experience of writing it fades into the dimmer recesses of my memory. However, the people have spoken, and due to popular demand I am taking the risk of posting the essay now.

The worldview essay is the capstone assignment of Honors Western Heritage, a required year-long course for freshmen in the J. N. Andrews Honors Program. (Due to schedule conflicts, I had to take the second semester of Western Heritage my sophomore year with a new freshman class; hence, I wrote this essay only a few weeks ago.) The worldview essay is intended to be the culmination of a year's worth of critical thinking and analysis, an exposition of the student's worldview in relation to the texts studied in Western Heritage.

The first question that most people ask after I share ideas from this essay is whether I actually believe what I wrote. I am scared to admit it, but the answer is yes. Although I expect my worldview to continue evolving throughout my life, right now my worldview paper does represent the ideas I find most attractive and plausible. Having said that, I intentionally took every idea to the extreme in this essay in order to explore the end result of my beliefs. Thus, even though I might shy away from my more extreme claims, overall my worldview essay is a sincere reflection of how I view the universe and my place in it.

---

## I Don't Care: Existential Sovereignty as a Foundation for Fluid Christianity

It was about a year and a half ago, as an overconfident and conceited freshman who was used to always being the smartest student in the room that I first encountered the concept of a worldview. Proud of my high school accomplishments and naively expecting college to continue being the breeze that all of my former education was, I was shocked to be introduced to such a revolutionary idea on the very first day of class. I had grown up in an extremely conservative Seventh-day Adventist family and community, a community that only acknowledged the possibility of one worldview and hence had no need for the term. Religion was often mentioned, but the concept of a worldview where God is anything other than the alpha and omega was so foreign to me that I could not fathom how "worldview" and "religion" could be anything other than equivalent terms. Thus, it was in that Western Heritage classroom, and during subsequent late-night discussions with my classmates and friends, that I first set out on the path towards a truly self-reflective worldview, a worldview that was _mine_ because I thoughtfully _chose_ it, not because it is the only possible outcome of a particular religious frame of mind.

Another blow to my initial confidence came with a radical new conception of what I previously thought was the familiar subject of mathematics. I must say more on this, for it was precisely philosophy of mathematics that drew me to my present worldview. Classical mathematics and Greek philosophy are very closely intertwined. This is not surprising since mathematics as we know it today originated in ancient Greece, where there was no distinction between philosophy, mathematics, and the natural sciences (Sciarabba, "Aristotle"). Speaking of the nature of numbers in _The Republic_ (c. 380 BCE), Plato asks us to consider that if the number one "is adequately seen, itself by itself, or is grasped by some other sense, it would not draw men toward being" (Plato 203-04). But, according to Plato, the nature of the number one, or, for that matter, of geometry and all other branches of mathematics, cannot be adequately described by the senses. Consequently, the "arts of calculation and number . . . lead toward truth" (Plato 204). Mathematics should be studied in the republic not so much "for the sake of buying and selling like merchants or tradesmen," but because the study of mathematics turns "the soul itself around from becoming to truth and being" (Plato 204). The primary value of the mathematical arts thus lies precisely in their power to cause one to "turn around toward the contemplation of what _is_," a power that allows us to somehow access and know something about the unchangeable Forms of numbers and shapes (Plato 204). In classical mathematics, mathematical objects are Plato's Forms: absolute, unchangeable, and true. This attitude towards mathematics, first articulated in _The Republic_, set the stage for centuries of mathematical enquiry. Euclid and his successors, up through Newton and Leibniz during the Enlightenment, espoused Plato's claim that the knowledge at which geometry and the rest of mathematics aims "is for the sake of knowing what is always, and not at all for what is at any time coming into being and passing away" (Plato 206). Like the religion of my childhood days, classical mathematics claimed to access the one and only truth, a truth that objectively exists.

All of this optimistic confidence in the power of logic and mathematics to attain absolute truth came to an end at the turn of the twentieth century. By this time, mathematics had become complex and diverse, a monster of a discipline whose rambling vines irked mathematicians' desire for unity and consistency. As an illustration, consider plane geometry. Euclid posited five axioms that can be used as the foundation for plane geometry. That is, we can assume these axioms and then use the rules of logic to prove all other true statements (theorems) about points and lines on a plane. One of these axioms asserts that given a line and a point not on the line, there exists one, and only one, line through the point that is parallel to the original line. But what if we instead postulate that an infinite number of distinct parallel lines exist through that one point? Then we get a geometry that contradicts that of Euclid but is nevertheless just as consistent (free of contradictions) internally. Indeed, this is known as hyperbolic geometry. One must then ask, which version of the axiom is true? Clearly, the two contradict each other. There is now a multitude of geometries, even a multitude of mathematics, that contradict each other but are logically consistent and beautiful within themselves. Which of these represents absolute truth? Things are even messier on the foundational level of set theory and logic, but the arguments are too technical for the scope of this essay. I must briefly mention, however, the attempt of logicians Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead in the early 20th century to create a unified theory of mathematics. In the preface to the first volume of their monumental _Principia Mathematica_ (1910), they state that they "have shown that it is _possible_ to construct a mathematical logic which does not lead to contradictions" (Whitehead and Russell viii). Alas, even these volumes, which represent the most ambitious attempt to create a complete and unified mathematics, failed to achieve their lofty goal. In 1931, Austrian American mathematician and philosopher Kurt Gödel dashed all such hopes by proving what came to be called his incompleteness theorems, which essentially state that the consistency of logic cannot be verified using logic and that it is impossible to find a complete and consistent set of axioms for any system that is at least as complicated as arithmetic. Consequently, mathematics lost both its claim to absolute truth and the means of reaching it.

The mathematical community not only failed to find a solution to the foundational crisis of mathematics, but also demonstrated that no such foundation can exist. Mathematics, contrary to popular perception, is the most unjustifiable field of human endeavor because it is not based on anything. Not only does it lack the data and empiricism of science, but even the axioms and rules that mathematicians assume to be true are full of paradoxes and cannot be stated in one coherent system. In his _Science and Hypothesis_ (1902), French mathematician Henri Poincaré proposed a radical solution to this foundational quandary: we should concern ourselves "not [with] which is the truest geometry, but which is the most convenient" (Poincaré 53). That is, we should accept mathematics as it is, with all of its paradoxes and lack of foundation, and simply use those axioms and rules that are convenient. His solution has since become the quotidian approach of working mathematicians who focus on their forms of the art without worrying about the universal reality or nature of the objects they study.

I tend to draw analogies between mathematics and other areas of my life, so once I realized the current state of mathematics I naturally considered the potential implications of such ideas to worldview. What if we are unable to create a unified worldview that truly explains reality just as we are unable to create a unified theory of the whole of mathematics? What if worldviews, like mathematical objects, are human constructions and not the absolute Forms of Platonism? Mathematicians and mathematics as a field of study seem to get along just fine without an overarching metanarrative, without even having a clue about the nature of the objects they study or their relation to reality. From this point on, the focus of my worldview shifted from accurate correspondence between thought and reality to useful correspondence. Accuracy is not as important as usefulness [1]. What matters in my everyday life is not whether I understand the essence and nature of external reality, but whether my beliefs about reality are useful and convenient. Indeed, this is the approach of many modern physicists, which Stephen Hawking termed model-dependent realism. In _The Grand Design_ (2010), Hawking urges us to consider the progressive sequence of ever more accurate theories of the universe. Clearly, modern quantum theories are more accurate than Newton's classical physics, but even these do not explain everything. Hawking asks the rhetorical question of whether "this sequence [will] eventually reach an end point, an ultimate theory of the universe, that will include all forces and predict every observation we can make," or whether we will "continue forever finding better theories, but never one that cannot be improved upon?" (Hawking and Mlodinow 8). But if our understanding of reality is only a model--a convenient representation--of actual reality, we must differentiate between perception of reality and reality itself. We certainly have a perception of reality, but there is no reason to suppose that our perception matches actuality.

Now that we have a distinction between reality (actual truth that is inaccessible to us) and our perception of reality (what appears to be a true description of reality, such as physics), we must ask ourselves whether knowing reality is even necessary. In the historical transition from theism to philosophical naturalism, Enlightenment deism existed from the late seventeenth into the first half of the eighteenth century as an unstable, transitional state (Sire 64; Sciarabba, "Deism"). In deism, autonomous human reason replaced revelation as the foundation of epistemology. God became distant and inaccessible, not unlike my formulation of reality. James Sire observes that "once the concept of God was up for grabs, there was no stopping his being reduced from the complex Christian theistic idea of God to a minimal, simple force" (Sire 64). But what is the purpose of such a depersonalized force? Julien Offray de La Mettrie, a key figure among 18th century skeptics of religion, argued that although he does not deny the existence of a supreme being, this being is but "a theoretic truth with little practical value" (qtd. in Sire 67). Thus, if God is so removed from our universe that he exists only as a first cause, his existence becomes superfluous (Sciarabba, "Deism"). Just as deism reduced God to the point of making him unnecessary, my reduction of reality to an inaccessible substance removes all necessity for its existence. I cannot say whether or not absolute reality exists, but I do not need to make such a claim. I simply do not care. Even if an external reality exists, its nature will have absolutely no bearing on my worldview.

The next logical step is to do away entirely with absolute reality. With it disappears the need for Sire's second worldview question. Instead, what I do care about is my perception of reality. This I cannot deny, for rejecting both reality and one's perception of it will necessarily remove all possibility for conscious experience. But an existence without conscious experience will not only be nonsensical, it will do away with the need for a worldview because the sole purpose of a worldview is to provide a lens or commitment through which we interpret and understand our conscious experience. Admittedly, the term "perception of reality" is somewhat misleading, since there is effectively no external reality to perceive. Yet there is perception. What exactly it is a perception of is left to my consciousness to decide. Hence, my existence, that is, my subjective conscious experience, is the only thing left to form prime reality, the only "thing" I can assume to exist _a priori_. My position then becomes essentially an existentialist one. In a 1945 lecture, French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre beautifully summed up the stance of atheistic existentialism by saying that "there is no other universe except the human universe, the universe of human subjectivity" (Sartre 10). In existentialism, humankind is sovereign.

By placing the individual at the position of sole arbiter of the universe, my construction of the human subject departs drastically from those of theistic worldviews. Consider, for example, the polytheism of ancient India as expressed in _The Ramayana_ (c. 500-100 BCE). In a particularly illuminating scene, the ugly, one-eyed monster Kabandha recounts his life story (_Ramayana_ 218). Kabandha was originally Dhanu, the archer of the sky, the god represented by the constellation Sagittarius (219, 689). Despite his strength and brilliance, one fateful day Dhanu happened to offend Indra, the god-king of all other celestial beings, and Indra struck off his legs. At first glance, Indra's action might appear to be the result of his superior strength, but the next sentence reveals that there was much more than mere strength or ability involved. Kabandha explains that Brahma, the creator god and one of the members of the Hindu Trinity, said, "'Live hunting with your arms, Dhanu'" (219, 688). Brahma cursed Dhanu, and the text makes it clear that Dhanu, now known as Kabandha, was in bondage and lost the memory of his former life (219). In other words, he did not have the power to act as he desired, to use his maya and take on any appearance he wished. Another being imposed a certain set of limits on Kabandha that restricted his ability to act as a free agent, that is, an outside factor beyond his control limited his agency. In ancient Indian belief systems, as well as in more modern religions such as Islamic theism, human beings live within a hierarchy. Those highest on the hierarchy, such as Brahma or Allah, can restrict the agency of those below them. But such limitations cannot exist in my worldview because the individual alone makes up the hierarchy through his or her perception of reality. To put it bluntly, no hierarchy of conscious beings exists. In the words of Sartre, "we are left alone" and "condemned to be free" (Sartre 5).

Essentially, I place the individual where Calvinist Christianity positioned God. Calvinism stresses the sovereignty of God--everything takes place through and by the will of God (Sciarabba, "Calvinism"). God not only determined human nature, but also predestined every person to either salvation or damnation. God is entirely responsible for everything. Existentialism, in contrast, posits that each _person_ is responsible not "only for his own individuality, but that he is responsible for all men" (Sartre 4). If an individual's subjective experience is the only universe, then that individual must "plac[e] the entire responsibility for his existence squarely upon his own shoulders" (Sartre 4). Since actual reality is inaccessible and perhaps even nonexistent, the individual creates a reality that is useful and assumes full responsibility for it. The individual must likewise take on full responsibility for the concept of usefulness, because even though it is influenced by one's perception of reality, ultimately the distinction between something valuable and something worthless is also a choice. Indeed, total agency is the defining characteristic of a human being in my worldview. Nineteenth century Danish existentialist philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, commenting on Hegel's presentation of humankind as a species of animals gifted with reason, objects that "in the animal world 'the individual' is always less important than the race. But it is the peculiarity of the human race that . . . 'the individual' is above the race" (Kierkegaard 8). In my worldview, a human being is an individual, that is, a being possessing a subjective conscious experience that to the person constitutes prime reality and provides for absolute and unrestricted agency.

At this point, it is natural to step back and ask why a worldview that denies the possibility of knowing reality and accents the absolute sovereignty of the individual is even necessary. Although mathematicians disregard the reality, or lack thereof, of mathematical objects and focus instead on convenience, perhaps that is a weakness of the field and not a strong point that should be emulated on the level of worldview. To this I will respond with two strengths of my worldview that are unattainable in any others: absolute personal freedom and impossibility of refutation.

During my childhood, I never considered the notion that worldview can be a choice. At most, the choice consisted of a decision between believing the clear truth or deluding oneself by espousing a lie. Once I grasped the radical freedom that allows me to _choose_ a worldview commitment, to _decide_ to adopt one orientation of the heart and not another, I determined to take hold of this newfound freedom and follow it to its logical conclusions. Freedom attracted me not only because it was something I did not know I had previously, but also because it gave me a certain feeling of deep satisfaction. Kierkegaard articulates this feeling by relating a hypothetical situation where, upon asking his servant to bring him a glass of water, the latter brings "the world's costliest wines blended in a chalice." Kierkegaard says that in this case he would dismiss the servant "in order to teach him that pleasure consists not in what I enjoy, but in having my own way" (Kierkegaard 7). I yearned to experience the pleasure of a mindset where I can have my own way, so I first turned to mathematics. Mathematics became my playground, a sandbox where I can dissect propositional statements and explore the implications of particular assumptions. It is a safe playground where I can try alternative axioms at will, where I can add and remove structure without fearing that my experiments will clash with reality. Soon after, I began considering a similar freedom for the real world, a level of agency unhindered by higher beings or the stifling silence of physical reality. Then I embarked on a thought experiment by extending the freedom of mathematics to the area of belief, and this is where I ended up. I reached the end result of existentialism, where my every choice reminds me that the individual has "no legislator but himself; that he himself, thus abandoned, must decide for himself . . . always by seeking, beyond himself, an aim which is one of liberation" (Sartre 11). No other worldview is capable of this liberation. If prime reality is a set of supreme beings, then I am bound to be limited by those beings. If prime reality is the external, physical universe, then I must be limited by its determinism and lack of meaning. Only when the individual conscious experience embodies all of prime reality can the individual be truly unfettered.

When the individual is sovereign, nothing external can ultimately refute or change the individual's beliefs. Calvinist Christianity enjoys the same type of protection, except that God, not the individual, is sovereign and without reproof. In his _Institutes of the Christian Religion_ (1559), Calvin explains that whoever "attempts to search out things that the Lord has willed to be hid in himself" will "enter into a labyrinth from which he can find no exit" (21.1). Calvin's theology is rooted in a deep fideism, an acceptance of things for no other reason than because God has so willed it. In an even more general sense, Calvin decries inquiring into knowledge as being a "foolish and dangerous, nay, even deadly" activity (21.2). Because God is sovereign, humans have no basis to question him. Likewise, if in my worldview I am sovereign, then I cannot be reproved, for "there will be no sign to convince me of it. If a voice speaks to me, it is still I myself who must decide whether the voice is or is not that of an angel" (Sartre 4). No other answers to Sire's first three worldview questions can result in an irreprovable worldview, because if anything other than one's own conscious experience is a known reality, then that object or being can be used as an external standard for judgment. In my worldview no external standard exists.

Whereas Sartre and other atheistic existentialist philosophers readily dismiss the existence of any kind of God, I find that to be a flaw in their reasoning. If the individual is totally free and sovereign, then there is no external authority to claim that God does not exist if I should choose to believe in one. Thus, I must consider two additional questions that do not fit in Sire's framework of eight basic questions: do I want to believe in God, and if so, what kind of God do I want to believe in? To the first my answer is a resounding yes. There are certain things that I want to be present in my reality, but that I cannot explain without invoking a transcendent God. John Horgan, a popular science writer, aptly sums up this quandary by stating that "just as believers in a beneficent deity should be haunted by the problem of natural evil, so Gnostics, atheists, pessimists, and nihilists should be haunted by the problem of friendship, love, beauty, truth, humor, compassion, fun" (qtd. in Sire 241). Since God is not prime reality in my worldview, Horgan's first problem does not apply. His second, however, deserves further comment. Sartre admits that his complete ousting of God is "extremely embarrassing," for if God does not exist "there disappears with Him all possibility of finding values" (Sartre 5). Yet there is no reason for this problem to exist. If the individual conscious experience is prime reality, then all external reality is contingent on individual choice. Nothing can prevent me as an individual from fashioning a personal, transcendent God to serve as a foundation for notions like beauty and _telos_. Of course, such a God must necessarily be subject to my choice and is thus on par with the rest of reality.

Concerning the characteristics of the God I choose to believe in, I decided that the primary ones should be personality and goodness. What is the basis of that goodness? The ultimate foundation is choice, but on a practical level I espouse the approach of the late Enlightenment French philosophe Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In his philosophy, Rousseau deviated from classical ideas by advocating for a more relativistic perspective (Carpenter). In _The Social Contract_ (1762) Rousseau wrote that "justice can be admitted among us only if it is mutual" (Rousseau 18). Since one cannot _choose_ a "mutual" justice over another form unless there are multiple options, Rousseau is admitting multiple conceptions of justice. He further elucidates this when he notes the need for justice to take into account the people being governed: "Just as the regimen of health doesn't suit the sick, it's wrong to try to govern a corrupted people by laws that would be right for a good people" (Rousseau 63). Like other Enlightenment thinkers Rousseau upholds reason as the source of justice (Carpenter), but for him reason does not lead to a _single_ formulation of justice. Rather, reason considers purpose when arriving at each _particular_ conception of justice. In the same way, my conception of goodness can change as needed to accommodate particular situations and respond to changes in my perception of reality. I refer to this as _fluid theism_ to contrast it with traditional Protestant notions of God that were heavily influenced by the theology of Augustine of Hippo (Sciarabba, "Augustine"). Augustine, in turn, based his ideas on neoplatonism, which at its essence is identical to Platonism with its insistence on immutable, absolute truths (Sciarabba, "Augustine"). In his _Confessions_ (397-400 CE) Augustine declares: "that which truly is is that which unchangeably abides" (124). When relating his conversion experience, Augustine focuses on how he saw "the immutable light higher than my mind," the "eternal truth." For him God ultimately "is Being"--the perfect, unchangeable truth of Platonism (Augustine 123). Unlike the immutable God of Augustine and traditional Protestant creeds, my God changes to manifest those qualities that I need at the present moment. The God I choose to believe in is a God who understands and relates to me, who will always listen to my rants when I am depressed and will share in my joy when I am happy. God epitomizes the perfect companion: a powerful, authoritative figure who nevertheless is always present and never contradicts my decisions.

The final concern I will address is whether my relegation of God to a subordinate position can be termed a valid interpretation of Christianity. The Enlightenment political philosopher Charles de Secondat, the baron de Montesquieu, provides an interesting perspective on why one should believe in a God who simply represents an ideal as opposed to being prime reality. In Montesquieu's _Persian Letters_, an epistolary novel published in 1721, the fictional Persian traveler Usbek explains to Rhedi, the young nephew of his friend Ibben, that "if there be a God, Rhedi, he must necessarily be just" because we cannot think of a reason for God to want to act unjustly (346). But if our conception of God is one of goodness and justice, then even "though there was no God, we ought always to love justice; that is, we should endeavour to resemble that being, of whom we have so amiable an idea, and who, if he exists, must necessarily be just" (Montesquieu 346). Essentially, Montesquieu is arguing that if we have an idea of a good and just deity, then it makes sense to believe in that deity and strive to become like it regardless of its existence in prime reality. Although I disagree with Montesquieu's claim that justice is an immutable "relation of congruity" between two beings (Montesquieu 346), his reasoning about belief in God holds equally well in my worldview. Thus, if the individual chooses to create a conception of God that embodies the individual's notion of goodness, then it is sensible for the individual to sincerely believe in that God and aspire to live in a way that pleases God, that is, in a way that ultimately reflects the individual's own view of goodness. In fact, my view of God is not exceedingly removed from that of existentialist Christians such as Rudolf Bultmann. Following the horrific devastation of World War II, Bultmann and his followers rose to prominence in Germany's theological landscape by teaching an existential approach to faith (Placher 256-57). According to Bultmann, a proper understanding of faith is not based on "the knowledge of some fact within the world or the willingness to hold some remarkable dogma to be true" (qtd. in Placher 256). What matters for a modern-day Christian are not the myths about Jesus, but rather the ability to make "a decision, a risk, a personal commitment" that leads the individual to "live a new life in response to that preaching" of the good news (Placher 256, 258). The existentialist's Christ saves through love, for if we realize that Christ loves us regardless of our decisions, then we will feel free to take risks without fearing the burden of full accountability for each decision (Placher 257). Such is the God I choose to create and believe in--a personal God of goodness, justice, and love who saves me from the heavy responsibility of existentialism by covering me with unconditional love. God is my constant companion and ultimate role model, a perfect "imaginary friend" that I choose to include in reality.

As I ponder the results of my thought experiment, I vacillate between the agonizing fright of my heresy and its mysterious appeal. I started by appropriating the core ideas of my philosophy of mathematics to reality and ended up in a position of ultimate agency. My present worldview satisfies my longing for total freedom and provides for meaning by leaving all explanations of external reality up to my subjective conscious experience, but it defies categories and often leaves me with mixed feelings. At its core it is most similar to atheistic existentialism, but it places an even greater emphasis on the individual as sovereign. At the same time, my worldview is theistic. Moreover, it incorporates a distinctively Christian form of theism because my God is primarily a loving, personal friend and savior. Yet it is a fluid Christianity, a faith that molds to my whims and wants and ultimately exists only to enhance my agency. One thing is certain: wherever my worldview journey will take me next, it is far from over.

[1] Here, I use _utility_ in a very broad sense that focuses on subjective factors such as happiness instead of evolutionary survival. The precise meaning of _useful_ depends on each particular context and is ultimately contingent on my choice, as I will explore later.

### Works Cited

1. Augustine. _Confessions_. Translated by Henry Chadwick, Oxford UP, 2008.
2. Calvin, John. _Institutes of the Christian Religion_. Translated by Ford Lewis Battles, edited by John T. McNeill. _The Library of Christian Classics_, vol. 1, Westminster John Knox Press, 2011.
3. Carpenter, Stephanie. "Philosophical Foundations for the Revolutions." Class Notes, Western Heritage 106, 7 Feb. 2018, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
4. Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu. _The Complete Works of M. de Montesquieu_. Edited by T. Evans and W. Davis, London, 1777. 4 vols. _Online Library of Liberty_, https://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/montesquieu-complete-works-4-vols-1777. Accessed 12 March 2018.
5. Hawking, Stephen W., and Leonard Mlodinow. _The Grand Design_. Bantam Books, 2010.
6. Placher, William C. _A History of Christian Theology: An Introduction_. 2nd ed. edited by Derek R. Nelson, Westminster John Knox Press, 2013.
7. Plato. _The Republic_. Translated by Allan Bloom, 2nd ed., Basic Books, 1991.
8. Poincaré, Henri. _Science and Hypothesis_. Translated by George Bruce Halsted, New York Science Press, 1905.
9. Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. _The Social Contract_. Edited by Jonathan Bennett, 2017. _Early Modern Texts_, https://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/rousseau1762.pdf. Accessed 12 March 2018.
10. Sartre, Jean-Paul. "Existentialism is a Humanism." Translated by Philip Mairet, 29 Oct. 1945, Club Maintenant, Paris. Lecture.
11. Sciarabba, Davide. "Aristotle." Class Notes, Western Heritage 105, 22 Sept. 2016, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
12. Sciarabba, Davide. "Augustine." Class Notes, Western Heritage 105, 7 Oct. 2016, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
13. Sciarabba, Davide. "Calvinism." Class Notes, Western Heritage 106, 18 Jan. 2018, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
14. Sciarabba, Davide. "Deism to Naturalism." Class Notes, Western Heritage 106, 5 March 2018, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
15. Sire, James W. _The Universe Next Door_. 5th ed., InterVarsity Press, 2009.
16. _The Ramayana_. Translated by Ramesh Menon, North Point Press, 2004.
17. Whitehead, Alfred North, and Bertrand Russell. _Principia Mathematica_. Cambridge UP, 1910.

---

This post was migrated from my previous site, so I decided to include all old comments below:

**Caleb**  
_5/1/2018 08:47:54 am_

>Hey Misha, very interesting and thought provoking. I like how you use principles of mathematics to help form your worldview. It is also very helpful to compare and test our views and ideas with scripture, the ultimate source of wisdom above all the philosophers of the world. Of equal or greater importance than how we view God, might be how he views us. Blessings in your journey!!  
>Psalms 8:3-4  
>When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast ordained; What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?

**Mykhaylo Malakhov**  
_6/1/2018 06:14:47 pm_

>Hi Caleb!
>
>It's great to hear from you! We haven't talked in such a long time.
>
>While I understand the perspective you are coming from, I think it is worthwhile to point out that your point only makes sense if we assume the existence of a Judeo-Christian God _a priori_. I decided to not make any such assumptions, and so I cannot consider the question "How does God view me?" without first answering "How do I view God?" What kind of deity one chooses to believe in necessarily determines how that person thinks the god or goddess views him or her. For example, if I were to believe in a bloodthirsty God of war, then I would be bound to maintain that God treats me as a pawn to participate in the strife he stirs up. Or if I were an atheist, it would be absurd to ask me to explain how God views me. Thus, it does not make sense to consider what God thinks about us (or anything else, for that matter) before we decide to believe in a particular conception of God. Once we make the choice to step out in faith and believe in Jesus, only then can we seek to understand the gospel and Christ's will for us. The importance of this choice is one of the central ideas in my essay.

**Eric 'Siggy' Scott**  
_5/3/2018 03:00:57 pm_

>What a spectacular essay! Kudos for putting in the work to develop it--you're clearly a much less lazy student than I was ;).
>
>Isn't the WH essay a delightful exercise? Being asked to think seriously about your world view right out of high school, especially for those of us who grew up in a conservative bubble, is exciting, liberating, and (of course) a little scary!
>
>Since you were brave enough to post it online, here are some counter-thoughts I had while reading.

>___
>First, can I just say that I love the whole genre of writing that WH papers usually fall into? It's the slam-shock of a young human mind hitting up against two timeless challenges: **pluralism** and **skepticism.** Pluralism teaches us that there are a zillion world views out there, and that most people believe whatever they were raised to believe (and, thus, where does that leave me? what are the chances that I just happened to be born into the correct sect?). Skepticism shows us that answering the question "how do we know anything?" is way more difficult than we tend to think.
>
>I used to think that these were quintessentially modern (or postmodern) challenges, but I've learned there is nothing **remotely** modern about these things. There are beautiful passages in Epictetus and Al-Ghazali that hit the pluralism problem right on the nail ages before Descartes or the postmoderns, and Greek and Indian skeptics were blowing the infinite regress problem in knowledge (including mathematical knowledge!) out of the water centuries before Christ.
>
>Point being, while it makes total sense that the contemporary philosophy of mathematics was an influencer for you--IMO the ancient Greek skeptics could have led you here just as efficiently as Gödel did!
>
>___
>I resonate strongly with a few of your points--and in particular the idea that "there is no other universe except the human universe."
>
>For me, the whole question of what is "really real" has lost almost all meaning. All we know--all we ever directly experience--comes from our senses and feelings. The existentialists said it, the empiricists said it, Kant said it, the ancient Greeks said it, and it seems self-evident to me. Everything beyond our subjective experience is just a causal model that we built to explain our subjective impressions, and we know from quantum mechanics that our intuitive grasp of "external" reality is certainly almost completely wrong.
>
>That is where my common ground with the existentialists ends, though. I don't believe that we are a blank slate. I don't believe that we "create our own meaning," or if we do, we can only choose our values within very narrow constraints. Right and wrong are defined (or heavily constrained) by the facts of human nature, and despite superficial evidence to the contrary, human nature is not a particularly fluid thing. Certain things are better, healthier, and more naturally desirable and beautiful for us than others. Specifically, as a practicing modern Stoic, I would argue that moral excellence is objectively the highest good for human beings--the most sublime and naturally desirable thing a human mind could wish for. i.e. "virtue is its own reward." Hard as that might be to prove, I would say that anyone who thinks otherwise--and who fails to see the value in refining their human agency and attention in the pursuit of virtue--is "ignorant" (as Socrates would say) of their own subjective human experience.
>
>So my worldview is as humanistic as the one you have described, but, as an ethical naturalist, I don't end up with a "choose your own adventure" story. Human life is best completed in certain particular ways, just like a half-line of iambic hexameter (to choose an ancient Stoic metaphor) is best completed in certain particular ways. Justice and love are not things I "choose," per se--they are things I either understand correctly about what is good for human beings, or get wrong. For Stoics, this leads us to a practice of spiritual exercise, habit formation, and mindfulness as we try and make progress toward the ideal "Sage"--our version of your "imaginary friend" ;).
>
>Aside--you say that an ontology that puts human subjective experience front-and-center is in tension with theism, but I don't think it needs to be (I say this as an atheist myself, so take it how you will). In order to approach God (any god), we have to start somewhere. IMO the only way that we could know that God is valuable, worth worshipping, or worth obeying, is by appealing to the atomic components of our subjective human experience. I don't think that religious arguments can ever bridge the is-ought gap. Humanistic ethics and values have to precede religious ethics and values--it is only by building on top of the foundation of human nature that religious ethics can start to provide some "value-add" or additional norms beyond what is already offered by a secular world view.

**Mykhaylo Malakhov**  
_6/2/2018 01:56:39 am_

>Hi Siggy!
>
>Wow! I see that I can count on you to offer a thorough response to all of my essays. I really appreciate your thoughts!
>
>First of all, I need to apologize for not responding sooner. Right after finals week I left for Madagascar, where I helped complete the assessment phase of the AU Engineers Without Borders energy project. Next year (given we are able to raise enough funds) we will travel back to that community and build a solar energy system to provide lighting and power in their school and other buildings. But now I'm home for a few weeks, so I have the chance to reply.
>
>I completely agree with you about WH! I would even go as far as saying that it has been my favorite class at Andrews so far. The wide range of sources I encountered, the thought-provoking discussions, and the opportunity to write meaningful essays are exactly what I envision liberal arts education to be. My only complaint is that the Honors courses have become a bit too easy and not rigorous enough, but maybe I should just delve deeper into the topics on my own.
>
I find your worldview very interesting. You dismiss the need for some external reality beyond our subjective human experience just as I do, yet you claim that within our subjective experience there is an objective, universal reality of human nature. I will admit that I did not dwell much on such an option. When rejecting the possibility of knowing an objective "external" reality, I dismissed that possibility for an objective "internal" (i.e. within our subjective experience) reality along with it. I will have to spend some more time thinking about this now, but it seems quite attractive. It is comforting to believe in universal standards, and a worldview with a comprehensible universal human nature is a lot closer to the Christianity we both grew up with than existentialism is.
>
>Where did I say that humanism is incompatible with theism? On the contrary, I explained how my existentialist framework provides a foundation for theism. I completely agree that in order to approach God we need to start somewhere. In existentialist flavors of Christianity that starting point is simply choice, which Kierkegaard called the leap of faith. In my worldview this leap of faith takes on a creative aspect, but the idea is similar. And as you explained, a worldview with a universal human nature can also provide a foundation for theism, albeit in a somewhat different way.

**Eric 'Siggy' Scott**
_6/9/2018 01:20:26 pm_

>Mykhaylo,
>
>Thanks for the response! I wish you well with your journey and mission project :).
>
>"I will have to spend some more time thinking about this now, but it seems quite attractive."
>
>Let me know if that train of thought leads you to any interesting reading!
>
>If you're interested in the route I've taken, here's a post that explains how I ended up looking to the ancient Greeks for my own humanistic "philosophy of life": https://ericsiggyscott.wordpress.com/2018/03/07/why-i-became-a-modern-stoic
>
>Salam,  
>Siggy
