+++
title = "The Influence of Low Social Class on Governmental Involvement"
date = 2019-01-09T00:00:00
lastmod = 2019-01-09T00:00:00
authors = ["admin"]
tags = ["Andrews University", "college essays", "history"]
+++

Frankly, I have little to say in introducing this essay. Among all of the essays that I wrote for Honors Western Heritage at Andrews University, this one stands out as being the only one whose thesis I could not recall from memory this year. However, I hope that it can still prove edifying, if not for its content, then at least as an example of first-semester college writing. Continuing the tradition of this blog series, I am posting this essay exactly as I submitted it for the assignment, without any further revisions.

---

## The Influence of Low Social Class on Governmental Involvement

Before civilizations existed, individuals were more or less equal, each one focused on his or her own survival and, to some extent, the survival of the tribe or clan. As societies became increasingly more complex, however, distribution of labor was unavoidable. Some had to travel long distances in search of game or pasture, while others were obliged to stay behind and tend to gardens or the raising of children. Not all occupations were viewed equally, and people who performed the tasks of priests or war lords clearly had greater importance and higher value than simple field laborers or, worse yet, slaves. Thus levels of importance developed into classes, and individuals began to be identified with their classes, which remained an inextricable part of social structures throughout the ancient and classical periods. These class structures became hereditary, and the class status of subsequent generations influenced the tasks those individuals were able to do and the ways in which they could interact with other individuals, including interactions with and within governmental organizations.

The relationship between the social class of an individual and his or her ability to contribute to government was certainly a complex one. Individuals' class standing determined whether they could participate in government, but had no effect on their ability to start new systems of government. This resulted because the ruling elites attempted to retain control over their governments by preventing lower-class individuals from becoming involved, but their efforts tended to backfire as lower-class individuals simply revolted and started new governments.

This claim is evident from an analysis of several major civilizations during the ancient and classical time periods. In classical Rome, the plebeians attempted to effect change in their government by working within it, but ultimately did not succeed. In ancient Mesopotamia, highly centralized governments controlled by kings with divine status and supported by an elite aristocratic class also barred low-class individuals from having any say or influence. Even in classical Athens, which is universally considered to be the most democratic state of those time periods, only a small portion of the population participated in government and the aristocratic classes dominated. However, low-class peasants revolted against existing governments and founded their own, as happened in the peasant revolts that lead to the founding of the Han dynasty in classical China. Finally, the Israelites in biblical times successfully revolted against the Pharaoh of ancient Egypt.

The first example of classical Rome clearly illustrates just how impossible it was for low-class people to make any changes in government through legal means. Roman society was composed of two primary classes: the patricians and the plebeians (Duiker and Spielvogel 118). The patricians "constituted the aristocratic ruling class" while the plebeians were everyone outside of that ruling elite (118). Therefore, the patricians were the upper class and the plebeians the lower. Although both could vote, only patricians could hold governmental offices (118). Plebeians naturally desired to have a say in the running of Roman government, and so engaged in a struggle for equal rights with the patricians that lasted for hundreds of years (118). Instead of overthrowing the existing government, however, they attempted to win increased rights by participating in it as much as they could (118). Some say that the plebeians "ultimately were successful" because they won the right to hold political office and created the council of the plebs, which "received the right to pass laws for all Romans" by 287 B.C.E. (118). However, these were only nominal victories and did not actually change anything in the functioning of the Roman government or the ability of the lower classes to be involved. Certain patrician families carefully intermarried with certain plebeian families, forming "a new senatorial aristocracy that came to dominate the political offices" (118). In other words, the lower classes never achieved the goal they were fighting for: representation in the Roman government. Although they technically won the right to participate, a new aristocracy emerged that effectively blocked outside access to political offices. Thus, classical Rome continued to have a ruling elite class that restricted the ability of lower classes to govern. Despite the plebeians' best efforts to change the government by working within it, they were not successful.

While in classical Rome lower-class individuals unsuccessfully attempted to participate in government, in ancient Mesopotamia government was so inaccessible to the lower classes that they did not even venture to take part in it. Sumerians believed that kings were direct representatives of the gods and therefore possessed ultimate authority. Kings "led armies and organized workers for the irrigation projects on which Mesopotamian agriculture depended" (Duiker and Spielvogel 11). Since Mesopotamia's economy was based on agriculture (11), this meant that the king alone was in charge of both the military and the economy. The immense amount of power concentrated in one individual seeped into the prologue and epilogue of Hammurabi's Code, where Hammurabi described himself as "the salvation-bearing shepherd" who "uprooted the enemy above and below, subdued the earth, brought prosperity to the land, [and] guaranteed security to the inhabitants" (Carpenter 15). One person, however, was obviously incapable of doing all of this himself, so the kings utilized the assistance of certain individuals. Sumerian society was organized around "four major social groups: elites, dependent commoners, free commoners, and slaves" (Duiker and Spielvogel 11). The elites were the only ones allowed to assist the king, and they made up his bureaucracy (11). The dependent commoners directly served the elites, but only in the function of servants, not advisers (11). Free commoners were "farmers, merchants, fishers, scribes, and craftspeople" (12). Since over 90 percent of the population was comprised of free farmers (12), this meant that the elite class was exceedingly tiny. Thus, the vast majority of the population had to suffice with calmly accepting whatever dictates their king and his elites handed down. A Sumerian citizen aptly summarized this relationship by saying, "You in your judgment, you are the son of Anu [god of the sky]; your commands, like the work of a god, cannot be reversed" (qtd. in Duiker and Spielvogel 11).

The situation remained largely unchanged even in classical Athens---the so-called cradle of democracy. Greek democracy began with the reforms of Cleisthenes, who came to power in 508 B.C.E. (Duiker and Spielvogel 95). He "created the Council of Five Hundred to supervise foreign affairs and the treasury and propose laws that would be voted on by the assembly" (95). The assembly, meanwhile, was composed of all male citizens (95). Although these reforms significantly expanded the circle of individuals able to participate in government compared to ancient Mesopotamia, the vast majority of the population still had no voice in the functioning of their state. Women, slaves, and foreign residents---effectively the lower classes---were barred from all public life (102). Even among the minority who had the right to participate in government, an aristocratic elite class existed, and these "aristocrats continued to hold the most important offices" (96). This aristocratic class was very intent on keeping its privileged position and high level of influence, and even when Alexander the Great conquered Athens in the fourth century B.C.E. the aristocrats fought to make sure they would remain the ruling class they had been under Athenian democracy (107). Athens, then, does not fit nicely into the modern definition of democracy, and was more of an extended oligarchy. Plato, who had a great influence on Greek civilization, went even further by advocating for a rigid class structure in which only a tiny elite class of philosophers would "rule as kings" with absolute authority (Bloom 153). Therefore, even in the most democratic state of the classical time period, lower classes were not able to influence the functioning of the system that to such a large extent determined the course of their lives.

The restrictions placed upon lower classes by the ruling elites can easily be understood, since, as seen in the case of Athens, the aristocrats did not want to risk losing their special privileges and the immense power they held. They certainly succeeded in preventing lower-class individuals from meddling in state affairs, but in some cases that only aggravated their problem. In China the emperor Qin Shi Huangdi "ruthlessly gather[ed] control over the empire into his own hands" (Duiker and Spielvogel 74), creating precisely the kind of system that existed in Mesopotamia hundreds of years before. This time, however, the lower classes could no longer stand the way they were excluded. Shortly after his death in 210 B.C.E. the Qin Dynasty was overthrown by a peasant revolt (74). One of the leaders of that movement was Liu Bang, "a commoner of peasant origin" (74). He emerged at the forefront of the strife and became the founder of the Han Dynasty, which ushered in China's classical period and became "one of the greatest and most durable dynasties in Chinese history" (74). Despite Qin Shin Huangdi's efforts to create a dynasty that, in the words of a contemporary, "would be enjoyed by his sons for ten thousand generations" (qtd. in Duiker and Spielvogel 74), he ended up alienating his subjects. The very policy of restricting the political involvement of low-class individuals that was intended to solidify his power instead led to the demise of his dynasty. What is vital to note here is that Liu Bang and his successors did not change that policy.

Although Liu Bang was a peasant himself, power in his government "was concentrated at the imperial court" which was naturally filled by members of a special class (74). His successors did institute the civil service examination in a nominal attempt to select "government officials on the basis of merit rather than birth" (75), but the candidates accepted into the academy to prepare for those examinations "were almost all from aristocratic or other wealthy families, and the bureaucracy itself was still dominated by the traditional hereditary elites" (75). Liu Bang was a peasant emperor, but his example shows that even though low-class individuals were able to influence government by overthrowing it, once a new governmental structure was instituted those former peasants who secured positions of power did all they could to keep it to themselves, creating a new aristocracy. Although the Confucian philosophers who advised Han rulers stated that "the people constitute in every way the mandate" (qtd. in Duiker and Spielvogel 75), this was interpreted to mean that rulers should please the people without giving them the opportunity to be involved.

The Israelites were also lower-class individuals who rebelled against their government, although in their case they separated from the Egyptians instead of completely overthrowing them. Even though the historicity of their exodus from Egypt is debated by historians (Duiker and Spielvogel 23), the Bible is known to be an ancient book and can at least serve as an example of the ideas of peoples living in Canaan in the ancient time period. According to the Bible, the Israelite tribes in Egypt were slaves, forced to work long hours under inhumane conditions (_Andrews Study Bible_, Exod. 1.14). They were certainly the lowest class in Egyptian society, and could not even dream of somehow becoming involved in the functioning of Egyptian government. The only way for them to have a voice in how they were governed was to break free from the government of Egypt and establish their own government. This is exactly what they accomplished. Pharaoh stripped the Israelites of their rights in an attempt to control them (Exod. 1.9-11), but ended up directly contributing to their desire to revolt and govern themselves. Pharaoh prevented those low-class slaves from participating in government, but the limitations placed upon them were incapable of inhibiting their ability to start their own system of government. The story of the Israelites demonstrates that ancient peoples in Canaan likewise thought that peasant revolutions are possible and can be undertaken. Furthermore, once the Israelites separated from Egypt they started a government controlled by strong, emperor-like leaders, beginning with Moses and eventually developing into an official monarchy. Just as in classical China, the formerly low-class individuals who started the new government became the elite ruling class, recreating the same system they had rebelled against.

Throughout the ancient and classical time periods, the histories of diverse civilizations around the world show that the ruling elites always attempted to retain their power over government by obstructing lower-class individuals' access to political office and other ways of becoming involved in government. The same examples also show that the lower classes did not always tolerate their lack of power to govern themselves and work with the existing government, and this prompted the lower classes to revolt and establish their own government. Yet when this occurred the formerly low-class individuals who managed to gain power again established aristocracies, repeating the cycle of marginalization, discontent, and revolt---a cycle that perhaps continues to this day.

### Works Cited

1. Bloom, Allan, translator. _The Republic_. By Plato, 2nd ed., Basic Books, 1991.
2. Carpenter, Stephanie. "The Code of Hammurabi." Class Notes, Western Heritage 105, 29 Aug. 2016, Andrews University, Berrien Springs, MI.
3. Duiker, William J., and Jackson J. Spielvogel. _The Essential World History_. 8th ed., Cengage Learning, 2017.
4. _The Andrews Study Bible_. New King James Version, General editor, Jon L. Dybdahl, Andrews UP, 2010.
