+++
title = "Violence or Humility: On Transient Dynamics in the Self/Other Binary"
date = 2019-02-12T00:00:00
lastmod = 2019-02-12T00:00:00
authors = ["admin"]
tags = ["Andrews University", "college essays", "literature"]
+++

The concept of juxtaposition must be among the most fascinating in existence. At least for me, the coming together of contrasting or antithetical notions always ignites a certain desire to explore and understand how each sheds light on itself by illuminating the other. Colorful juxtapositions exist in every branch of human endeavor, not the least of which is literature.

​Below is an essay I recently wrote that explores a set of fundamental yet elusive juxtapositions: violence/humility, transience/permanence, and Self/Other. This is a continuation of my current blog series, where I post essays that I wrote for various classes. In particular, this one hails from Honors Literature and the Arts. As always, I look forward to engaging with your thoughts in the comments!

---

## Violence or Humility: On Transient Dynamics in the Self/Other Binary

One rarely pauses to ponder the fleeting moments of life. Too often we focus exclusively on the grand and monumental, on the experiences fit for a biography and the achievements worthy of a curriculum vitae. We quickly set aside those brief iotas of life: the strangers we conduct business with, the apartments we temporarily inhabit, and the countless unfamiliar faces that pass before our eyes in today's cosmopolitan world. Yet the question begs asking, what meaning, if any, do ephemeral encounters with other individuals hold? If there does exist a significant didactic or even formational element in the transient dynamics of life, then art -- with its characteristic juxtaposition of dynamic subject matter and static format -- must be poised to illuminate the answer. Eugène Delacroix and Jhumpa Lahiri both address this topic in their works, proffering starkly contrasting perspectives on transient encounters with the Other. While Delacroix's painting _Street in Meknès_ epitomizes a passively distant attitude towards the Other that leaves both parties entrenched in their respective group identities, Lahiri's short story "The Third and Final Continent" demonstrates the power of momentary encounters with the Other to transform the interacting individuals if approached from a position of epistemic humility.

 According to Edward Said, the notion of superiorly knowing the Other _a priori_ prevents any kind of meaningful encounter. Said begins his landmark essay on Orientalism by quoting Arthur Balfour's 1910 lecture to England's House of Commons, where Balfour explains what he thinks should be the proper relationship between England and Oriental nations like Egypt. Balfour "takes them [British superiority and Egyptian inferiority] for granted" by focusing on the consequences of knowledge. According to him, educated Englishmen like himself understand Oriental civilizations in their entirety, from their primitive roots millennia ago through their rise and fall and even to their future failures or successes. Such knowledge entails "rising above immediacy, beyond self, into the foreign and distant" and being able to accurately scrutinize and correctly judge the Other -- a skill that Oriental peoples themselves apparently do not have (31). Inevitably, the Orientalist philosophy leads to a view where "Subject races did not have it in them to know what was good for them" (37). Orientalism expects the Occidental man (for it was always men who governed) to approach the Other already having complete knowledge of the Other's past, present, and future. No meaningful encounter with the Other can occur, for to the Western observer the Other exists only as defined by the West. Said's reasoning applies equally well to encounters with the Other outside the scope of Orientalism. Any approach to a relationship with the Other that presupposes a full understanding of the Other necessarily creates a disengaged attitude and precludes the possibility of a transformational experience.

 In _Street in Meknès_ (1832), Eugène Delacroix evokes the point of view of a passive tourist, one who already understands the Other and hence overlooks the opportunity for a meaningful encounter. The artist presents the scene from the viewpoint of a passerby on the street. He positions the walls directly in front but at an angle, indicating that the observer is stealing a glance at the dwelling while walking by, too busy to approach closer and interact. Furthermore, the strong vertical lines of the doorway in conjunction with the leaning poses of every figure create an atmosphere of stillness, as if the image is a snapshot memory of a quick glance that failed to apprehend the actions and ways of life in the dwelling. Overall, Delacroix epitomizes what Linda Nochlin terms the picturesque, which at its core serves to "draw the line between Them and Us" (51). The artist most conspicuously portrays this divide by the looming dark doorway into the building. A faintly painted figure appears to lounge within, but any detail beyond that evades our sight. Delacroix chooses to leave out all furnishings, for as articulated by Said, the Western observer already knows what to expect and thus has no need to engage and investigate. Furthermore, the photorealism of the folds of clothing, dusty ground, and dirty walls presents a complete reality to the viewer. As Nochlin explains, such picturesque realism serves to "authenticate the total visual field as a simple, artless reflection ... of a supposed Oriental reality" (38). But if the complete reality is already apparent upon a quick glance, then the observer has no need to meaningfully engage and feels free to disregard the fleeting opportunity for an encounter with the Other.

The figures portrayed likewise reinforce the status of the viewer as aloof and choosing to avoid encounter. All individuals in the painting are in a state of rest, and the lone figure in the darkened doorway is fully reclining -- a marked contrast to the observer's hurried passing. While the older lady on the far left looks directly into the eyes of the observer and thereby begs for engagement, the hint of agency she displays is offset by the static, disengaged portrayal of the other individuals. The younger girl looks to the right instead of directly at the observer, and the seated man stares blankly to the left. Their gazes direct our focus to the center of the composition, but there Delacroix only greets us with the most obscure and least engaged figure of them all. Moreover, the vertical walls divide the people into disjoint sets, thereby diminishing the communal aspects of their life. The artist's stylistic strategy of separation results in "the strict avoidance of any hint of conceptual identification or shared viewpoint with [his] subjects, which could, for example, have been suggested by alternative conventions of representation" (Nochlin 51). Instead, Delacroix depicts the vision of a tourist, who in cursory passing objectifies each individual instead of holistically acknowledging the dynamic interconnectedness of their society and the observer's own proximity to them.

The situation is vastly different in Jhumpa Lahiri's short story "The Third and Final Continent," where the main character by necessity forms a relationship with his Other, Mrs. Croft. Lahiri makes their otherness to each other apparent from the start; the main character (who is the narrator and hence remains unnamed) is a young, recent Bengali immigrant, while Mrs. Croft is a Caucasian American who has presumably lived in the United States her whole 103 years. Notwithstanding this gap the narrator rents a room in Mrs. Croft's home, and by necessity starts interacting with her. He notes that as a boarder, he "was not her son, and apart from those eight [dollars], [he] owed her nothing" (Lahiri 189). His interactions with Mrs. Croft are purely professional, conducted out of respect and obligation. Moreover, they are exceedingly brief, consisting of a ten-minute evening ritual: "she slapped the bench, ordered me to sit down, declared that there was a flag on the moon, and declared that it was splendid. I said that it was splendid, too, and then sat in silence" (183). When the narrator moves away to an apartment appropriate for his wife Mala, Lahiri once again emphasizes the obligatory and transient nature of his relationship with Mrs. Croft: "I was only a boarder, a man who paid her a bit of money and passed in and out of her home for six weeks. Compared to a century, it was no time at all" (191). Yet even this brief and almost forced encounter is sufficient to distinguish the narrator from the passive apathy of Delacroix's _Street in Meknès_. As the narrator slowly comes to know Mrs. Croft better during his stay with her, Lahiri demonstrates how he "began to worry" and realized that due to Mrs. Croft's age every day "was something of a miracle" (188). He expresses concern for Mrs. Croft, offering to heat her soup in the mornings and assist in all the small ways that his formal relationship with her allowed. In doing so, the narrator typifies Martin Heidegger's ideas on the ecstatic structure of attunement. As scholar Lawrence Hatab explains, Heidegger's conception of empathy originates from "an ecstatic being-in-there-with-the-Other," that is, a spontaneous state of being thrown into a relationship (366). The narrator is spontaneously thrown by necessity into a relationship with Mrs. Croft, which not only allows him to express empathy, but also prevents him from presupposing any knowledge of her. The narrator and Mrs. Croft only briefly cross paths in life, but the spontaneous and obligatory nature of their relationship occasions a meaningful encounter.

Unlike Balfour in Said's definition of Orientalism, here the narrator acknowledges his lack of understanding of Mrs. Croft and her way of life. That is, the narrator seeks to appreciate her identity, so distant from his, "to picture the world she had been born into, in 1866" (189). He learns to follow along with her quirks, obliging to her mannerisms by assuring her that he locked the door, exclaiming "Splendid," and putting the rent in her hands. However, the narrator never presumes that he can fully understand the life of Mrs. Croft. When he first found out her age, he "was mortified." (187). In fact, immediately after this statement of mortification Lahiri details how different his mother's life was. Unlike Mrs. Croft, his mother "refused to adjust to life without" her husband and died soon after her husband's death (187, 182). Lahiri underscores the contrast between the worlds of Mrs. Croft and the narrator, but points out that he fully realized that the world of Mrs. Croft will always be to some extent inaccessible to him, just as his world is inaccessible to Mrs. Croft. Throughout the story, the narrator's attitude is one of a humble learner, who even in the brief moments of an obligatory relationship understands that he has much to learn and nothing to teach, much to appreciate but nothing to dictate.

Yet this transitory relationship, formed of necessity with an Other who is as unlike the narrator as possible, left a profound impact on him. Sometime later, he brought his wife Mala to visit Mrs. Croft. The narrator's romantic relationship with Mala was at this point still distant, the product of an arranged marriage followed through out of duty rather than emotion. His feelings towards Mala were as to "the arrival of a coming month, or season -- something inevitable, but meaningless" (189). Even after a week together in America, Lahiri plainly states that they "were still strangers" (192). It is in Mrs. Croft's home, while comparing the two women, that the narrator first realizes his attachment to both. Mrs. Croft and Mala were both strangers, thrown by fate into worlds not their own, just as the narrator had been not too long ago. Both crossed paths with him of necessity. As he and Mala stood in front of Mrs. Croft that night, he realized this and wanted to explain it all, but could find no words. Instead, for the first time, the narrator and Mala "looked at each other and smiled" (196). The transient relationship with Mrs. Croft enabled the narrator to accept and love Mala. He poignantly summarizes this by stating, "I like to think of that moment in Mrs. Croft's parlor as the moment when the distance between Mala and me began to lessen" (196). Consequently, they drew even closer to each other over the years, and at the end of the story the narrator notes that now Mala is "amazed, as I am, that there was ever a time that we were strangers" (197). Lahiri concludes by explaining that the narrator's journeys across three continents and the transformation of his relationship with his wife are ordinary achievements, facilitated by the ordinary experiences of encountering new people and experiencing new places (198). The narrator's brief relationship with Mrs. Croft, although on the one hand ordinary and obligatory, engendered a lasting impact.

The key divergence between Lahiri's and Delacroix's presentations of transient encounters with the Other lies in their differing epistemologies. When distinctly different individuals meet, each satisfies Gayatri Spivak's definition of the subaltern as a member of the "group whose identity is its difference" (32). In that sense, such individuals become "subalterns" to each other. But as Spivak beautifully argues, the subaltern cannot speak and instantly bridge the gap of understanding (35). What, then, is the outcome? The present artworks illustrate two possibilities. Delacroix's _Street in Meknès_ reflects the epistemic violence fundamental to Said's Orientalism. The artist presents the view of a passive tourist who, assuming complete _a priori_ knowledge of the other, feels little need to try to listen and engage. Among the most egregious elements is the reclining man in the center of the painting. By virtue of being elderly and in a reclining position, the man parallels Mrs. Croft in Lahiri's story. Yet while Delacroix conceals the reclining man with dark strokes to indicate that we should least notice and engage with him, Lahiri's narrator meaningfully interacts with Mrs. Croft, who in turn lastingly impacts him. In contrast to the Orientalist attitude in Delacroix's painting, the transformational power of transient relationships in Lahiri's story beautifully resonates with Seyla Benhabib's discursive worldview. In particular, Benhabib defines the identity of a Self as "constituted by a narrative unity, which integrates what 'I' can do, have done and will accomplish with what you expect of 'me' in the future, etc." (5). That is, Benhabib's construction of the self is a necessarily social one. The Self cannot exist without the other, so it follows that a Self cannot fully realize itself, i.e., cannot truly become a Self without the Other. This interdependence invokes a sense of humility that utterly contradicts Orientalist self-sufficiency. Even a brief, forced encounter with an Other can define the Self and produce a lasting impact when approached through epistemic humility.

Eugène Delacroix and Jhumpa Lahiri both captured transient relationships in their artworks, but chose to convey vastly different messages. By careful positioning of visual elements in _Street in Meknès_, Delacroix created an atmosphere of passive disengagement that mirrors the injurious epistemic framework of Orientalism. Delacroix's observer is aloof and self-sufficient; the observer's purported possession of a thorough knowledge of the Other robs him or her of any need to meaningfully encounter the Other. Meanwhile, the narrator in Lahiri's "The Third and Final Continent" humbly approaches the Other, permeated with the realization that he cannot fully comprehend her world just as she cannot comprehend his. Notwithstanding the insurmountable rift between their worlds, fate forces the two characters to collide, and they part, not with comprehensive knowledge of each other, but with identities reshaped by the transient encounter. In contrast to Delacroix's ontologically stable world, Lahiri's exhibits communicative dynamism and grants every impermanent encounter the power to induce a permanent transformation.

### Works Cited

1. Benhabib, Seyla. _Situating the Self: Gender, Community and Postmodernism in Contemporary Ethics_. Routledge, 1992.
2. Delacroix, Eugène. _Street in Meknès_. 1832, Oil, Albright-Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo.
3. Hatab, Lawrence J. "The Ecstatic Nature of Empathy: A Heideggerian Opening for Ethics." _Journal of Philosophical Research_, vol. 26, 2001, pp. 359-80.
4. Lahiri, Jhumpa. _Interpreter of Maladies_. Houghton Mifflin, 1999.
5. Nochlin, Linda. _The Politics of Vision: Essays on Nineteenth-Century Art and Society_. Harper and Row, 1989.
6. Said, Edward W. _Orientalism_. Vintage Books, 1979.
7. Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. "Can the Subaltern Speak?" _The Post-Colonial Studies Reader_, edited by Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin, Routledge, 2006, pp. 28-37.
