---
title: "You Are My Neighbor: Toward a Distinctly Christian Immigration Ethic"
subtitle: ""
summary: ""
authors:
- admin
tags:
- Andrews University
- college essays
- religion
categories: []
date: "2019-08-11T00:00:00"
lastmod: "2019-08-11T00:00:00"
featured: false
draft: false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Placement options: 1 = Full column width, 2 = Out-set, 3 = Screen-width
# Focal point options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
image:
  placement: 2
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references
#   `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects: []
---

I am very proud to be an immigrant. When my parents and I moved from Ukraine to California we did not know a word of English, but we brought with us a rich cultural heritage and the tenacity to, in the words of Lin-Manuel Miranda, "get the job done." While my family was fortunate to have a legal path into the United States, many others currently live under a constant fear of ICE while buffeted about by systemic, blatant xenophobia and racism. One might think that the inclusive message of love conveyed by the Gospel of Jesus Christ would lead all Christians to embrace immigrants, but churches are comprised of people, and both religious and non-religious people alike tend to imbibe the often toxic national conversation on immigration. I am sad to say that in several churches that I had known as "home," simply mentioning sympathy for undocumented immigrants draws criticism for being a "godless liberal" who has succumbed to the "propaganda" promoted by left-wing media. Is there a better alternative for conversations on immigration within the Christian church?

During the spring semester of my freshman year at Andrews University I took a class from Prof. Davide Sciarabba titled Religion and Ethics in Modern Society. In one of my frequent after-class discussions with Prof. Sciarabba, he suggested a revolutionary idea: what if immigration policies are best examined not in a partisan context, but from the (hopefully) politically-agnostic perspective of Christian ethics? I could not stop thinking about such a possibility, and the present essay is the result of my ruminations that semester. Although I spent more time critiquing other scholars' viewpoints instead of developing my own, I hope that this essay can advance the Christian conversation on immigration. What do you think is the way forward? Let me know in the comments!

***

## You Are My Neighbor: Toward a Distinctly Christian Immigration Ethic

**Abstract:** The purpose of this paper is twofold: First, I wish to present the case for the creation of a Christian immigration ethic. Among the little immigration ethics thought that does exist, almost none is approached from a distinctly biblical viewpoint, even though a systematic Christian immigration ethic would be beneficial to believers and nonbelievers alike. Second, I wish to lay the initial groundwork for such an ethic. Specifically, I will argue that a biblical immigration ethic must be based on migration systems theory which, when interpreted within biblical notions of justice, results in an argument for open borders.

Philosophy rightly takes its place among the most ancient and venerated branches of human thought. Before human beings began to contemplate the principles of counting or the methods of agriculture, they were already engaging with the deepest questions of life. As soon as intelligent life appeared on the face of this planet, the creatures felt compelled to ask, "Who am I, and what is this world around me?" Right along with examining such metaphysical notions came the idea of ethics. How should I behave? Why should I choose one course of action and avoid another? Throughout the ages the most brilliant thinkers have attempted to tackle these questions. From Plato, to Augustine, to Hobbes, to Kant, multitudes of scholars have created a vast assortment of philosophical knowledge, addressing issues as diverse as the existence of God and the rights of artificial moral agents. Yet despite thousands of years of thought, or perhaps because of them, the field of philosophy remains as relevant today as at any point in our history. We can assume that the same is true of ethics, the most practical of the three branches of philosophy and the most relevant to day-to-day existence. It might seem like every possible area of ethics has been thoroughly studied. We are all familiar with numerous classic treatises such as Aristotle's *Nicomachean Ethics* and Nietzsche's *Beyond Good and Evil*, which deal with the more "basic" ethical notions of what constitutes good and evil in the general sense. Yet even in applied ethics, few stones have been left unturned. Even futuristic topics like machine ethics, which deals with the moral behavior of yet-to-be-invented artificially intelligent beings and thus has absolutely no relevance to our day, has been extensively considered and continues to enjoy a thriving research interest.

Yet there is one glaring anomaly in the above trend: the exploration of the ethics of immigration has received relatively little attention. It takes only a quick search in any comprehensive academic database to realize that while artificial intelligence ethics, for example, boasts hundreds, if not thousands, of papers and books, immigration ethics can point to only a handful. This fact becomes the more surprising given the increasingly prevalent discussion of immigration policies and issues in the headlines of major newspapers and television shows. Yet all of these discussions focus on immigration "in terms of economic perspectives, security perspectives, and cultural perspectives" (Melkonian-Hoover, "Politics" 26). It would only seem logical that the academic community would weigh in as well, not only from the perspectives of political science or sociology, but also from the unique perspective that ethics brings. One must admit that there has been some response. In 2013 Joseph Carens published his landmark book *The Ethics of Immigration*, which represents the culmination of a lifetime of work and attempts to provide a comprehensive treatment of the subject (Carens x-xi). Others have also contributed, among them Mathias Risse (Risse 25), David Miller (Miller *Strangers*), and others. Yet the list is still exceedingly brief in comparison with most other branches of ethics. According to Michael Blake, "philosophical discussion of immigration is still in its infancy" (Blake). When Joseph Carens first started exploring the ethics of immigration he attempted to examine what the accepted academic literature had to say on this topic, but was surprised to find out "that there was no such literature" (Carens ix). As already noted, the situation has somewhat improved since then, but the collection of immigration ethics research is still disappointingly minute, especially in light of the increasingly prominent place that immigration occupies in contemporary politics.

Given how little attention has been granted to immigration ethics in the broadest sense, it is clear that the body of research on immigration in the context of Judeo-Christian thought is even smaller. As noted by Ruth Melkonian-Hoover, "absent from much of this discussion [of immigration policies] have been religious perspectives" ("Politics" 26). This is even more unfortunate, since we as Christians have the responsibility to be "the salt of the earth" and "the light of the world" (Matt. 5.13-14), demonstrating a Christ-like ethics based on love. While Christian scholars have contributed extensively to various branches of ethics they, like their secular counterparts, have largely ignored the vital question of immigration. Yet the Christian perspective on immigration ethics is not only merely relevant, but vitally important to the overall discussion of this subject, especially in the United States. Even one with a secular worldview must acknowledge that in the United States Christianity "is the religion of the majority of the population." Furthermore, since most immigrants into this country currently come from Latin American countries, which are predominantly Catholic, Christianity is the religion of the majority of immigrants, which makes churches the social institutions most directly impacted by and involved with issues of immigration (Melkonian-Hoover, "Conflict and Consensus" 1). This is yet another compelling reason for Christian scholars to develop a systematic, biblical immigration ethic. It also seems that Christianity should have plenty to say on this subject. Apart from the command to worship God, no admonitions "are repeated more frequently in the Old Testament" than those regarding strangers (O'Neill and Spohn 84). It would also be absurd if the more familiar principles from the New Testament did not have implications to immigration. Again one must concede that some scholarship has been conducted along these lines, but most of it does not focus on ethics per se. For example, in the spring 2011 special issue of *The Review of Faith & International Affairs* titled "Christian Perspectives on US Immigration Policy" only two articles explicitly attempt to treat the issue of ethics. The author of one simply states that immigration "is a moral issue" and then goes on to specific policy recommendations that have no direct grounding in the Bible or Christian ethical theories (Staver 55-56). The other article does examine the issue from an ethical perspective, analyzing the success of current United States policies at enforcing security while protecting human dignity, then makes specific policy recommendations for the country in general and Christians in particular (Smyers 41-45). Although the ethical concern of human dignity is addressed, the author still fails to develop a systematic immigration ethic or even point towards a potential structure for approaching immigration from an ethical perspective. The rest of the papers focus on immigration policies and impacts, and can thus be thought of as works of political science and sociology from a theological perspective. There is nothing wrong with such an approach, but it is not sufficient for it fails to explore immigration as an ethical, rather than just a sociological or economic, issue. Although an analysis of the papers presented at one conference is not necessarily representative of the whole academic community, it is easy to see that such is the case in this situation. Within the little Christian immigration research that does exist, ethics is only a minor concern.

Perhaps there is a good reason for these dire observations. Maybe it does not make much sense to examine immigration from an ethical perspective. Before one attempts to develop an immigration ethic, it must be established that immigration is a fundamentally ethical issue; if it is not then there is absolutely no reason to continue this argument. Carens notes that many people consider immigration and citizenship to be "political issues, not moral ones" since self-governing societies should choose who to include and exclude (Carens 6). In fact, this is the argument used by most proponents of closed borders. For instance, Christopher Wellman argues that legitimate states are entitled to self-determination, which includes freedom of association. Consequently, freedom of association includes freedom not to associate, which means that states have "a deontic right to close the borders against even the most needy would-be immigrant" (Blake). Although this claim is problematic for several reasons, even if one accepts it as completely true it in no way leads to the notion that immigration is not a moral issue. The key point here is that there is a difference between the authority to do something and the morality of that action (Carens 7). For example, most Protestant denominations assert freedom of choice for every individual. According to that scriptural interpretation, one has a deontological right to choose his or her own actions. For example, a person may choose to either break the Ten Commandments or to keep them. However, this in no way implies that the keeping of the Ten Commandments is not an ethical issue. Although one has the right to choose, there still are ethical considerations. One may choose a wrong action or a right one. Likewise, even if we admit that states have a deontological right to close their borders, that does not imply that immigration control is not an ethical issue. It only implies that states have the right to choose between a wrong and a right course of action. Therefore, the primary argument against examining immigration from an ethical perspective is logically unsound.

The field of immigration ethics is vast, made the more expansive by the little development done on it so far. Thus, this brief essay cannot do justice to the whole of it. Most public attention is devoted to voluntary transnational migration, so that is the only type of migration this paper will address. Furthermore, since most Christian discussions of immigration have focused on policies, I decided to step back and examine the big picture. Instead of focusing on the morality of particular policies in light of the current political climate, the only question this paper will consider is the morality of immigration control in the most general sense. Is it moral for states to exclude immigrants, and if so, then to approximately what extent? It is my sincerest hope that further scholarship from both myself and others will build upon the general foundation laid here and explore how a biblical immigration ethic can be expressed in concrete and feasible political policies. Herein I only wish to somewhat illuminate the path to be trodden.

All studies of ethics must begin with a set of assumptions. In this article I will base my arguments on a postliberal interpretation of Scripture. Namely, I will approach the Bible as a narrative self-description of God's people. I favor this approach since it allows for a balance between reducing the Bible to a set of generalized moralisms and "collapsing into some version of fundamentalism" (Placher and Nelson xvi). This approach is particularly suited to ethics, since viewing Scripture as a coherent yet pluralistic collection of narratives allows us to extract ethical principles while remaining true to the intention of the text and disregarding cultural and other tangential concerns. If done properly, this will result in a biblically correct ethic untainted by transient concepts---an ethic that can be applied to present-day situations. Furthermore, I will make no assumptions regarding the rights of states. For an immigration ethic to be truly biblical, it must not rely on liberal political theories or any other presuppositions, however obvious they may seem, unless they can be deduced from Scripture using the above method. As a consequence, I will not assume that states have a right to control immigration.

One more crucial assumption needs to be clearly articulated. Although ethical theories are distinct from migration theories, it is impossible to explore the ethics of immigration without a framework for understanding immigration, i.e., without some form of a migration theory. Although leading political philosophers such as Joseph Carens and David Miller do not explicitly state what migration theory they use, they nevertheless rely on one or another, perhaps without even realizing it (Rajendra 356, 360). As stated by Tisha Rajendra, Carens, Walzer, and Miller all tend to rely on neoclassical migration theory (355). According to this theory, the sole driving force of migration is the fact that migrants are rational agents who migrate in search of better life opportunities. Thus, in neoclassical migration theory the migrant is akin to an informed consumer: he or she evaluates all of the countries to which it is feasible to immigrate, compares them with the current country of residence, and makes a decision, choosing the option that will maximize happiness. Since happiness or well-being is most often thought of in terms of financial opportunities, wage differences become the driving force behind immigration. In other words, "migrants are needy and distant others, clamoring to enter the political community." The political community, meanwhile, is concerned with protecting "its identity by controlling the number and composition of strangers who enter" (Rajendra 362). Thus, immigration ethics becomes a question of the rights of the community versus the rights of the migrants. Miller comes to the conclusion that self-determination dictates that community rights take precedence, leading to a closed borders argument. He does acknowledge that states must take justice into account when determining which immigrants to admit, but even here he views justice in light of neoclassical migration theory by examining the rights of immigrants along with their reasons for wishing to enter (Miller, "Justice" 403). In the end, the decision of admission is still left entirely up to the state. Carens, on the other hand, argues that democratic principles imply that individual rights, including migrant rights, take precedence over state rights, which leads to an open borders argument. For example, Carens states that the premise that all human beings are of equal moral worth implies that all should have equal opportunity, and since freedom of movement is necessary for equal opportunity justice stipulates that the individual right to freedom of movement must override a political community's right to freedom of association (Carens 227-228). Although the conclusions of Miller and Carens differ drastically, both rely implicitly on an ethics grounded in neoclassical migration theory.

The failure of leading scholars such as Miller and Carens to explicitly state and justify their use of neoclassical migration theory is the greatest flaw in their arguments. Since, as shown above, the choice of a migration theory directly impacts our view of immigration justice, in order to create a truly biblical immigration ethic it is critical to choose a migration theory that is in accordance with Scripture. I will argue that migration systems theory perfectly suits this criterion. Migration systems theory rejects the neoclassical notion of migrants as fully autonomous rational agents, instead viewing "the migrant in her social, political, historical and economic context" (Rajendra 362-63). Migration systems theory views migration as the result of a complex interplay of relationships between countries, communities, and individuals---relationships that are deeply rooted in history and culture. Thus, migration can be thought of as "a corollary to other types of relationships" (Rajendra 363). These relationships consequently give rise to migration systems, which are large-scale patterns of immigration between two or more countries. Often these migration systems are initiated by state actions such as conquest or colonialism. For instance, while neoclassical migration theory explains current immigration from Central America to the United States solely in terms of individual decisions to migrate due to push and pull factors, migration systems theory shows how the current flow of immigrants is part of a migration system initiated by the quasi-colonial relationships that the United States developed with countries like El Salvador and Guatemala (Rajendra 363). As noted above, these migration systems are also strongly influenced by other types of relationships. These relationships can be economic, such as foreign investment. The relationships can also be social. Immigrants always develop "social networks such as families, communities, small immigrant-owned businesses" that "help new migrants follow the path of people who have already migrated" (Rajendra 363). Although migration systems theory does acknowledge the presence of traditional push and pull factors such as wage differences, it views them within the context of a range of multifaceted and complex relationships.

Aside from the intuitively greater accuracy of migration systems theory due to its completeness, its anthropological presuppositions are in accordance with Christian beliefs about the human person and lead to a biblical view of justice. Since migration systems theory revolves around the concept of relationship, it views the individual as "indeed an rational, but also a relational agent." People do not act in a social and historical vacuum; every decision "always occur[s] in the context of our relations to one another, our communities and the past" (Rajendra 364). As humans we do not make our decisions as a computer might, based solely on objective factors. Instead, our decisions are influenced by the lens through which we view the world, a lens of culture, heritage, worldview and, above all, the many relationships between us and the people, communities, and institutions of the world. In migration systems theory, humans are beings of autonomy-in-relationship. Such a view is in accordance with biblical anthropological notions. From the creation story we see that the primary characteristic separating mankind from animals is relationship. The natural state for people is to be within a community of other people, enjoying various relationships with each other (Gen. 2.18). Human beings were also created to have a special relationship with God. In fact, the whole Bible is a narrative of relationships between God and his people. In the Garden of Eden it was typical for God to converse with Adam and Eve. Later we read of relationships between God and the patriarchs. Throughout the Old Testament, God revealed himself in various ways to prophets. Even common people thought of God as a being with whom they can have a relationship, as seen in the many conversational prayers in the psalms. Thus the human being of migration systems theory is also the human being of the Bible: an individual exemplifying autonomy-in-relationship.

Not only does migration systems theory rely on biblical anthropological presuppositions, but also gives rise to an ethics in harmony with Scripture. Since migration systems theory stresses relationships, it is clear that an ethics based on it "would focus on justice-in-relation as the ethical norm" (Rajendra 366). Instead of equating justice with the satisfaction of rights such as freedom and self-determination, as an ethics arising from neoclassical migration theory does, migration systems theory leads to an ethics of just relationships. An ethics based only on rights or duties is incomplete, for it fails to take into account the biblical view of a person as a relational agent. An ethics of justice-in-relationship, however, is exactly the type of ethics displayed in the Bible. It is most clearly demonstrated in Isaiah 1, where God condemns the Israelites for following religious ordinances while ignoring their relationships to fellow human beings (Isa. 1.11-17). God pleads with his people to "Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow" (Isa. 1.17). In the psalms, justice is likewise equated to defending the poor and fatherless (Ps. 82.3). Likewise, in the New Testament those who are "undefiled before God and the Father" are those who "visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction" (Jas. 1.27). In the sermon on the mount, Jesus uplifts the qualities of being merciful and peacemakers (Matt. 5.7,9)---qualities that are inherently relational. Later on in the sermon he even admonishes his followers not to bring offerings to the temple until they have reconciled and mended their relationships (Matt. 5.23-24). Numerous other examples exist, culminating in the scene of the second coming, where the righteous, i.e. the just, are invited to inherit the eternal kingdom. These are the ones who gave food to the hungry and drink to the thirsty, took in strangers, clothed the naked, and visited the prisoners (Matt. 5.34-40). Throughout the Bible justice is not centered around ensuring individuals' rights or maximizing freedom. Justice is clearly expressed through just relationships, relationships reflecting what we call Christian virtues. Such a view of justice has been a part of the Christian faith throughout its history. Thomas Aquinas wrote that justice is an inherently relational virtue that does not exist without the existence of a relationship (Aquinas II-II, Q. 58, A. 2-3). Likewise Matthew Henry, in his highly regarded *Exposition of the Old and New Testaments*, wrote that "righteousness towards men is as much a branch of pure religion as religion towards God is a branch of universal righteousness" (Henry 658). Once again righteousness, or justice, in the biblical sense happens in the context of relationship.

What, then, are the implications of justice-in-relationship ethics to immigration? If we consider states to be political communities, then immigration into a state represents a change in the relationship status between the immigrant and the community. Thus we must analyze both the pre-immigration and post-immigration relationships, and consider whether a change from one to the other is just. Prior to immigration the immigrant and the political community are two entities that, by means of being on the earth, are in physical proximity and thus able to interact. In other words, they are neighbors. Thus, the situation is similar to the story of the good Samaritan (Luke 10.29-37). As the familiar narrative illustrates, a just relationship between neighbors is one that is based on love, a love that wills the well-being of the other irrespective of the other's demographic, social status, or identity. Except in the extreme and exiguous cases of migration for the intentional purposes of terrorism or crime, the migrant desires to migrate to achieve a greater good (usually personal, but at times familial or of another type), as prompted by the relational forces acting upon her. In consequence, the pre-immigration situation is one of potential: a potential for the community to create a just relationship between itself and the potential immigrant by accepting her into the community, thereby acting to further the immigrant's well-being. A failure to act on this potential does not increase the immigrant's good, resulting in a relationship without increased justice. Since the allowance of immigration results in a more just relationship, we have at least a *prima facie* case for open borders, with a few minimal exceptions for security purposes. Alas, a proper development of this argument is beyond the scope of this paper.

Assuming that a biblical immigration ethic is one of open borders, as the above argument appears to suggest, the natural question is why such an immigration ethic is needed. Carens, for instance, already created a well-developed open borders argument. Why formulate another? The primary reason for the necessity of a distinctly Christian immigration ethic is the fact that the ethical theories of Carens and others rely on non-biblical principles for their foundation. Therefore, they are not fit as standards of behavior for a Christian. Furthermore, every additional sound argument for open borders contributes to an "overlapping consensus" (Rawls, 340), making the case ever more convincing for those of a wide variety of confessions, worldviews, and ideologies. Such a consensus is essential if these ideas are to ever escape the printed page and become a centerpiece of international political policy. Urging states to transition from the currently accepted approaches of heavily restricted immigration to one of virtually open migration will never be an easy task, but it will be entirely impossible unless the case for open borders is convincingly developed from all commonly accepted premises, including the ethical principles we find in the Bible.

### Works Cited

1. Aquinas, Thomas. *Summa Theologica*. Translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province, vol. 2, Westminster: Christian Classics, 1948.
2. Blake, Michael. Review of *Debating the Ethics of Immigration: Is There a Right to Exclude?*, by Christopher Heath Wellman and Phillip Cole. *Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews*, July 2012, https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/32280-debating-the-ethics-of-immigration-is-there-a-right-to-exclude/.
3. Carens, Joseph H. *The Ethics of Immigration*. Oxford UP, 2013.
4. Henry, Matthew. *A Commentary on the Holy Bible: With Practical Remarks and Observations*, vol. 3. Funk & Wagnalls Company, 1850.
5. Melkonian-Hoover, Ruth. "Christian Conflict and Consensus in the Immigration Debate." *The Review of Faith & International Affairs*, vol. 9, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-3.
6. Melkonian-Hoover, Ruth. "The Politics of Religion and Immigration." *The Review of Faith & International Affairs*, vol. 6, no. 3, 2008, pp. 25-31.
7. Miller, David. "Justice in Immigration." *European Journal of Political Theory*, vol. 14, no. 5, 2015, pp. 391-408.
8. Miller, David. *Strangers in Our Midst: The Political Philosophy of Immigration*. Harvard UP, 2016.
9. O'Neill, William R. and William C. Spohn. "Rights of Passage: The Ethics of Immigration and Refugee Policy." *Theological Studies*, vol. 59, no. 1, 1998, pp. 84-106.
10. Placher, William C. and Derek R. Nelson. *A History of Christian Theology: An Introduction*. 2nd ed., Westminster John Knox Press, 2013.
11. Rajendra, Tisha M. "The Rational Agent or the Relational Agent: Moving from Freedom to Justice in Migration Systems Ethics." *Ethical Theory and Moral Practice*, vol. 18, no. 2, 2015, pp. 355-369.
12. Rawls, John. *A Theory of Justice*. Rev ed., Harvard UP, 1999.
13. Risse, Mathias. "On the Morality of Immigration." *Ethics & International Affairs*, vol. 22, no. 1, 2008, pp. 25-33.
14. Smyers, Jen. "Immigration and Security: Public Policy and Christian Ethics." *The Review of Faith & International Affairs*, vol. 9, no. 1, 2011, pp. 41-47.
15. Staver, Mathew D. "The Ethical Imperative for Reform of the US Immigration System." *The Review of Faith & International Affairs*, vol. 9, no. 1, 2011, pp. 55-56.
16. *The Andrews Study Bible*. New King James Version, General editor, Jon L. Dybdahl, Andrews UP, 2010.
